# Cubicle Bubblewrap Runner

This document describes using Cubicle using the `bubblewrap` runner.
[Bubblewrap](https://github.com/containers/bubblewrap) is a light-weight
mechanism that runs on Linux only. Under Bubblewrap, the host's root partition
is shared read-only with the environments.

## Security

Cubicle relies on Bubblewrap and the Linux kernel for isolation, which aren't
perfect. Users should review Bubblewrap's security and, of course, keep up with
Linux kernel updates.

Environments with access to X11 probably have full access to your keystrokes.
See <https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Bubblewrap#Sandboxing_X11> for more info.

Under Bubblewrap, Cubicle does not currently limit host network access,
allowing containers to access services on the local host and local network. The
UNIX domain abstract socket namespace is also shared between the host and the
containers, since it is also tied to the network namespace. (This is actually
how containers running under Bubblewrap currently access the X11 socket without
any setup.)

Under Bubblewrap, Cubicle does not currently limit the resources used by its
containers. This may leave containers vulnerable to attacks like unauthorized
cryptocurrency mining.

### Seccomp Filter

Bublewrap's security depends on setting a restrictive
[seccomp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seccomp) policy, to limit the system
calls available to the sandbox environment. Developing such a policy requires a
careful audit of what is safe or unsafe to expose in the Linux kernel, which is
a moving target.

Cubicle does not currently ship such a seccomp filter for Bubblewrap. Users are
encouraged to borrow a seccomp filter from one of these projects:

- Podman/Buildah/CRI-O's seccomp filter is here:
  <https://github.com/containers/common/blob/main/pkg/seccomp/seccomp.json>.
  This filter does allow running Electron apps with the Chromium sandbox.

- Docker's seccomp filter is in
  [moby/profiles/seccomp](https://github.com/moby/moby/tree/master/profiles/seccomp)
  in both JSON format and Golang. This filter doesn’t allow running Electron
  apps like VS Code with the Chromium Sandbox turned on. See
  <https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/42441> for details.

- Flatpak's seccomp filter is around here:
  [common/flatpak-run.c](https://github.com/flatpak/flatpak/blob/main/common/flatpak-run.c#L3073)
  in `setup_seccomp`. I haven't tried this one with Cubicle.

This [short C
program](https://github.com/bradfa/tlpi-dist/blob/master/seccomp/dump_seccomp_filter.c)
can dump a compiled BFP seccomp filter that is installed in a running process.
It uses
[`PTRACE_SECCOMP_GET_FILTER`](https://manpages.debian.org/bullseye/manpages-dev/ptrace.2.en.html#PTRACE_SECCOMP_GET_FILTER)
to do this. Extracting a filter this way can be easier than trying to compile a
BPF filter from the above source code.

## Installation

Cubicle is made up of a Rust program that runs on the host and a collection of
shell scripts for package setup that run in containers.

### Installing Dependencies

You'll need [Rust and Cargo](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install). The
version in Debian 11 is too old.

Install the other dependencies:

- `bwrap` - Bubblewrap, Linux light-weight container tool. Note that while
  bwrap used to be a setuid binary, this is no longer needed on modern
  distributions.
- `curl` - HTTP client.
- `git` - version control system.
- `jq` - command-line JSON processor.
- `pv` - pipe viewer, displays progress bars.

On Debian 11, you can install the dependencies using `apt`:

```sh
sudo apt install bubblewrap curl git jq pv
```

### Installing Cubicle

Assuming you'd like to install into `~/opt/cubicle` and already have `~/bin` in
your `$PATH`:

```sh
echo 'runner = "bubblewrap"' > ~/.config/cubicle.toml
cd ~/opt/
git clone https://github.com/ongardie/cubicle/
cd cubicle
cargo build --release
ln -s $(pwd)/target/release/cub ~/bin/cub
```

## Configuration

Inside your `cubicle.toml`, set `runner` to `"bubblewrap"`. You must also
create an object named `bubblewrap` with the following keys:

### `seccomp`

- Type: path (string) or `"dangerously-disabled"`
- Required

If set to `"dangerously-disabled"`, the Bubblewrap runner will not apply a
seccomp filter. This will likely allow code inside the environment to easily
escape out to the host.

Otherwise, the runner will pass this file to `bwrap` through its `--seccomp`
option. The file must be in compiled BPF program format, as generated by
`seccomp_export_bpf` from `libseccomp`.

If you haven't done so already, please read the security section on why you
need a good seccomp filter. I've extracted a filter from a running Podman
container on my amd64 machine and shared it here for convenience:
<https://ongardie.net/static/podman.bpf>. I don't know whether this is secure
(for any sandboxing purpose) or will remain so over time. Podman is released
under the Apache-2.0 license.

## Uninstalling

First, exit out of any running Cubicle environments.

Assuming the same paths as in the installation instructions above:

```sh
rm -r ~/opt/cubicle/
rm ~/bin/cub
```

You may also want to remove these directories if you're done with all your
Cubicle environments:

```sh
rm -r ${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-~/.cache}/cubicle/
rm -r ${XDG_DATA_HOME:-~/.local/share}/cubicle/
```

## Cubicle Environments

Each Cubicle environment consists of three logical filesystem layers:

| Layer   | Host Path (with default XDG base dirs) | Container Path  | Lifetime |
| ------- | -------------------------------------- | --------------- | -------- |
| 1. OS   | `/`                                    | `/` (read-only) | long     |
| 2. home | `~/.cache/cubicle/home/ENV`            | `~/`            | short    |
| 3. work | `~/.local/share/cubicle/work/ENV`      | `~/w/`          | long     |

1. The base operating system. This is currently shared with the host's `/` and
   read-only inside the container.

2. A home directory. Inside the environment, this is at the same path as the
   host's `$HOME`, but it's not shared with the host. It lives in
   `${XDG_CACHE_HOME:-~/.cache}/cubicle/home/` on the host. The home directory
   should be treated as replaceable at any time. Cubicle populates the home
   directory with files from packages when you create the environment (with
   `cub new`) or reset it (with `cub reset`). Currently, the home directory is
   populated with physical copies of package files, so the home directories can
   be large (a few gigabytes) and can take a few seconds to initialize.

3. A work directory. For an environment named `eee`, this is at `~/w/` inside
   the environment and `${XDG_DATA_HOME:-~/.local/share}/cubicle/work/eee/` on
   the host. The work directory is where any important files should go. It
   persists across `cub reset`.

There are a couple of special files in the work directory:

- An executable placed at `~/w/update.sh` will be run automatically at the end
  of `cub reset`. This can be a useful hook to re-configure a new home
  directory.

- A file named `~/w/packages.txt` keeps track of which packages the environment
  was initialized or last reset with. It is used next time the environment is
  reset (unless the user overrides that on the command line).
